All right.
We're talking with Paul Gale.
We're at the Newbury Library in Chicago.
It's October 4th, 1990.
And I guess we're here to talk about a collection.
I think you said downstairs that this has often been described as a collection of collectors as opposed to a collection of collections.
Well, it's usually called a collection of collections, but I think of it more as a collection of collectors in a way because from the beginning,
the Newberry staff has looked for private collectors whose efforts would help in the building of the collection.
I think almost all major research libraries nowadays do this, and I think the great multi-layered collections like New York Public have been doing it for a century or more.
But
It's something that, in some ways, I suppose people in the profession don't talk about because it seems so mercenary, when in fact it's a public education effort.
What you get out of it ultimately is a collection that comes into public hands.
But in the meantime, it allows people in a library like the Newberry or Harvard, Roger Snyder certainly does plenty of this, to work with collectors, let them learn from the expertise of the staff,
get advice and help from staff members on how to buy and what to buy, what's interesting, what's important.
Kind of with an eye to the future, too, do you think?
Well, it works both ways.
I mean, we're looking at you cultivate donors for the sake of donations, but also for the sake of teaching them something.
And even more important, and this is what kind of worries me sometimes, is that the
the tradition of philanthropy in book terms is dying out in this country, or it seems to be.
We don't have the kind of broad-based interest in the library's programs that we had 100 years ago.
100 years ago, there would be 20 and 30,000 people come through the doors at the Newberry every year.
Now, that doesn't mean 20 or 30,000 potential donors, but a larger number of those people were interested
and getting something out of the public education efforts of the library than any popular library does today.
This is true not only of libraries, but the peak, for example, for museum attendance in Chicago was in the 1930s.
It was before people had videos and radio.
They had radio, but they didn't have television.
They didn't have home entertainment.
And so for entertainment, they went to museums.
And in those days, the museums were all free.
Now you have to pay to get in.
One of the things I think we do is to educate people to cultivate interests in books and educate them to cultivate a public interest in books, that is, in collecting books for the larger public.
And I don't think we're doing a bad job of it.
I think that we just have to pay attention to it as a process because it isn't something that you can let go.
It may just be my post-1980s depression that I'm worrying that, you know, a whole group of newly rich people came along in the 1980s who haven't been encouraged in particular to be interested in classical music or in classical cultural activities of other sorts as well.
And who were in fact encouraged by the book dealers in the 80s
to collect for investment purposes, which is not a good reason to collect.
You should collect for your own personal interest, and if you can add to that a public interest, that's great, a public service interest.
It is interesting, and maybe it's kind of a, maybe there is a contradiction here.
Book collecting has ever been more popular than it is, well, that probably has to be qualified.
I think it's become a more democratic pursuit.
It's not strictly a pursuit of the very wealthy.
No, that's fine.
I think that's great.
But on the other hand, you say you don't really see this kind of philanthropic intensity that is characterized collection development in places like that.
I don't see very many people doing what, say, Alfred Hamill, who was the president of the Newberry and one of the trustees from
He was a trustee from the 20s, and he was president from 1931 until his death in 1953.
H-A-M-I-L-L.
No, it's H-A-M-I-L-L.
I don't see people doing what he did, which was to create a calligraphy collection deliberately as a complement to an existing Newberry collection with the idea that his collection, there's only about 400 books, 500 books, would come to the Newberry in 1953 after his death as a
a building upon a collection he had acquired for the Newberry.
Which was?
The Ricketts Collection, which is described a little bit in the exhibit downstairs.
The Ricketts Collection was easily the most important collection on calligraphy in North America in the 19th century.
Ricketts was an engrosser.
That means he had a shop where they did handwriting and illuminating of certificates and all kinds of things for businesses.
How do you spell engrosser?
E-N-G-R-O-S-S-E-R.
And...
He ran this workshop from the 1880s on in Chicago and collected books on handwriting, everything from little penmanship books that were being used in the 19th century to the great monuments of calligraphic handwriting.
That collection was offered as a block starting in the 1930s.
Unfortunately, the Newberry trustees couldn't, I mean, it was the Depression, the Newberry trustees couldn't see their way clear to acquiring the collection as a block.
So it was broken up.
The bulk of the writing books, the technical material that had to do with handwriting and which was unduplicated anywhere, was bought by the trustees from the estate.
I think the year was 41.
And the remainder of the collection was dispersed
The largest number of the manuscripts went to the lily, and you could ask to see the block of manuscripts that are in the lily.
A sense of the importance of the Ricketts collection you can get out of de Ricci.
Have you discovered the de Ricci manuscripts?
And that's only the medieval manuscripts, but his collection goes on for pages and pages, and you can see how important it was.
He was, however, collecting them as writing samples, as samples of handwriting, not as
beautiful blocks, or for other reasons.
You know, Samuel Pepys did the same kind of thing.
Have you ever seen the Pepys?
I was there last year, yeah.
But there's a collection of calligraphy.
Did you see that?
I didn't see the calligraphy collection.
I think it was Humphrey Winley was the one who collected it.
Oh, really?
Yeah.
No, I didn't know that.
Oh, I have to ask to see that next time.
Richard Luckett showed me through that.
Yeah, he's in that business.
He's great.
I would suggest, I would make a suggestion.
I said, gee, he was a collector.
And he said, no, he's not a collector.
I said, well, he is.
He said, please.
He said, let's not be tedious.
He said, let's not be tedious and boring.
He said, listen.
I said, shut up at that point.
It was wonderful.
But anyway, I'm sorry.
But in any case, what I don't see happening, the point of the way we got off on this, is I don't see somebody like Hamill who collects for
You don't see very many people who collect deliberately with the notion that their books will remain not a monument to themselves in a public collection, but a sort of working library that deliberately complements another library.
We have a number of examples of this in Newberry History.
You've probably read a little bit about the Ayer Collection, which is our American Indian collection.
And that's complemented by two other collections.
One is Graff, which is a collection of Western Americana, which was built by one of our trustees, Graff, who knew what was at the Newberry and was collecting what was not at the Newberry.
It was intended to be a complementary collection.
Similarly, Ayer has a Latin American component, which is mostly Mexican and Peruvian colonial material.
And another one of our trustees, by the name of William Greenlee,
was in the 20s and 30s and 40s.
I think he died in the late 50s, maybe in the 60s.
Anyway, he was collecting Brazilian material, which is a perfect complement to that.
A group of collectors that collected around the library gathered around the library because there was a public in the staff and in the wider public for their collecting.
constitute the collection of collectors that I think are at the core of the new brain.
And, you know, I used the word earlier when we were talking where the library co-ops these people.
That sounds more negative than I would like.
That has maybe more negative connotations than I would like.
It is what we're doing, because in a sense what we are doing is harnessing the energy of these people
And in many cases, they're very considerable knowledge, because when you become a collector in a focused field, you become much more expert than the experts.
Brady McTeague said exactly the same thing.
He said, they do it with so much more taste, with so much more enthusiasm, and when they give it to you, it's fully formed.
That's right.
It's wonderful.
And an area that you might never have collected on your own.
Absolutely.
And they include the things.
that for one reason or another, usually because of the vagaries of academic fashion, are not collected by institutional collections.
Because they're not considered scholarly.
Sure.
That's right.
Years ago, most institutional collections didn't collect popular printing because it was ephemeral, it was small, it was hard and expensive and tedious to catalog.
But the private collectors were collecting that stuff because it really is
interesting, often very beautiful and fascinating, and it has a lot to say about particularly the spread of high culture ideas to popular culture theaters.
And now, of course, in the last 25 years, last 30 years, American academics have suddenly decided that this is where it's at, that you only write social history if you can get a sense of what little people were interested in.
And so you look for ballad sheets, and you look for posters, and you look for theater tickets, and all the ephemeral things that institutions didn't collect 30, 40 years ago.
I work in Worcester, I think I mentioned to you.
I'm the book editor for the Worcester Telegram.
It's my day job.
But we have the AAS in Worcester.
And of course, that's a mecca.
That has collected ephemera before it was ever known as that.
Could you cite any collections which you have received
As an example of what you just said.
Yeah, after his death in the late 60s, we received from the estate of Will Ransom a very major collection of small press ephemera.
Well, Ransom was the scholar bibliographer who worked on private presses in England and America, starting in the teens and twenties and working right up to his death.
He did several, a series of bibliographies on private presses.
That's without a knee on Ransom, right?
That's right.
It's just like Ransom.
Like Harry.
That's right.
And he was never rich enough to buy the books, but he corresponded back and forth with all of the
printers and kind of teased out from them lists of the things they had printed and even their ephemeral printing sometimes and then got them to give him the prospectuses for books and the advertisements and the catalogs and the Christmas cards and all of that is in an alphabetical sequence that he put together along with a parallel sequence we're indexing these now that's why they're sitting in my office a parallel sequence of his notes on every
individual printer or paper maker.
Dart Hunter was a paper maker.
Dart Hunter in here is on the Huntington as a press.
How does this collection give the scholar?
A lot of people come to use it.
Often it gives them the advertising press, the come on to collectors that a given press was developing.
Or the prospectus might give them some of the physical information about a book they can't find or can't get a hold of that helps them fill out the picture.
The other thing that's interesting about it is because Ransom was kind of an omnivore and was interested in a lot of many smaller presses that don't get written up anywhere else, he'll have a series of notes on something that really was very ephemeral.
Chicago suburban press called The Vanishing Press, and it's literally nearly vanished.
And yet the man who put it together had a lot of taste and a lot of flair and a hilarious sense of humor.
And the books are interesting, and they're an interesting example of kind of American suburban culture in the 20s and 30s.
And especially with your much stronger collections, they certainly do support.
They throw in some gaps.
Yeah.
The other thing is because it's organized very rigidly and alphabetically.
If I get a reference question, what can you tell me about E.S.
Richardson, Jr.
and the Vanishing Press, I can go right to a series of files and say, well, here's 75 miscellaneous facts.
Maybe they'll add up to something.
These books are full of newspaper clippings, and those are hard to come by.
Little small town press articles particularly, unless you knew
that there was an article in the Worcester paper about something.
You would never go there.
And even if you went there, you'd have to go through a back file.
That's right.
You'd have to go through a back file.
And nowadays on film, it's even harder to do that.
So the collection is just invaluable.
It chronicles a period when the fine press movement was just bursting with energy and was partly responsible for creating
the mania for collecting books, because the printers, I think, were creating objects that people could get excited about.
This is good stuff.
Somebody's out here, let's look in.
We're talking about the Wing now, who's the granddaddy of the Wing collection.
He was an extra illustrator.
Have you run across that phenomenon?
No.
In the 19th century, it was kind of a common collector's phenomenon to take Victorian books
I mean, take contemporary books and split them apart and insert illustrations drawn from other sources, either other books or from collections of, in his case, lots of collections of older engravings.
So he would take an Oscar Wilde play and illustrate it, extending it to sometimes 10, 15 volumes, you know, an article for a book that was only a very small book.
And then he would have a title page privately printed
for it, explaining what, you know, he was a publisher, and so that's why he was able to, you know, he had all these connections.
He would have them printed that would describe what he had done to the book.
And usually it describes himself as a joker or as a misanthrope or one or another of his characters that he played.
And then often he would put this portrait in as the frontispiece
facing them.
I'll show you these books in the stacks tomorrow if you're going to be back tomorrow.
They're absolutely hilarious.
And then, in his latter years, he had an office here at the Newberry.
The building was so big, and there were so few books in those days, that they just gave him a room where he could work on his own work.
And he would have them rebound.
He would then have these books bound up in the Newberry Bindery at the time.
And
So they exist now as a separate group of books that, again, are mentioned in the will, that they're only to be consulted in the presence of the Wing custodian, the custodian of the Wing Foundation.
The reason for that being that they, because they're pasted together, they're a little bit, it's kind of a fragile sort of a little.
Give me a read on Wing.
The best word is eccentric.
There's no other way of putting it.
I keep a few of his artifacts of his life around the office here.
He made his fortune as a commercial publisher.
And, you know, Chicago was early on an important center for commercial publishing.
And he did this kind of book, which is... It's basically...
puff prose about Chicago, the tunnels and water system of Chicago, which was, yeah, which is, that's right, stamped, gilt stamped, cloth binding, which was one of the, it was in fact one of the engineering wonders of the world, along with the, yeah, the tunnels that go out under the lake to bring our fresh water in, and this pumping station, which is now a water tower, which is still a monument, it's one of the few things to survive the fire.
This was built during the Civil War, and it was at the time one of the largest pieces of masonry work ever undertaken.
And this is a kind of beat-up copy.
There's a better copy in the collection, but it has all these copper plate and wood engraved illustrations about how the work was done.
And then it has this fold-out plate that shows the way the system works with the city and the lake.
That's way ahead of its time, isn't it?
Well, as a piece of publishing, it's booster prose for the city, which is a great tradition in Chicago.
Chicagoans love to brag.
He also published books on the World's Fair in 1993, and he made his fortune, actually, as a publisher of trade magazines, his most important titles being one called The Landowner, which was for farmers, and one called...
really for gentlemen farmers.
One word, landowner?
Landowner, no, it's two words.
And the other one was called the Western Brewer, which was a trade magazine for brewmasters.
And of course, in those days, every little town had its own brewery, so there was a built-in public.
The Newberry has the only complete run of the Western Brewer to survive, and it was his own.
He retired when he was 47 and spent the rest of his life
collecting books and extra illustrating them.
He was a bachelor.
Didn't seem to have much use for any woman except his sister and his mother.
Was very irreligious.
He was deliberately... He baited people about the question of religion.
It was one of the things he liked to do.
And this is one of his... Which he had.
wound up with the title Gallery of Religious Hypocrisy.
And what it is is just his clippings.
There are two volumes.
It's his collection of Newsbreaker clippings about religious hoaxes.
English War on the Jesuits.
He put this together.
Yeah, this is his scrapbook.
There's a number of his scrapbooks here.
I can show them to you.
Ministers must believe in Adam according to the New York Presbytery.
professor of theology, defends hazing at Yale.
His whole thing is that anybody who's religious is automatically anti-progress and anti-modern, and a Christian scientist upheld court reverses conviction for failure to report diphtheria.
Now, there's a contemporary issue.
Church is cold to working there.
I don't know if you follow the hazing stories, which are very current.
I mean, kids have been really hurt and humiliated by some hazing.
Here's one from the heartland where I was born.
Hartford, Wisconsin.
Holy Hill, Feast of the Assumption, celebrated by 2,000 pilgrims.
That's where you're from?
My family comes from there, yeah.
So he was just collecting newspaper clips on
religious nonsense, according to him.
So this really was his monument, then, his legacy.
Well, I think his original intention, I've got the papers here, you can look through them tomorrow, I think his original intention was to create an endowment for the Newbery to collect extra illustrated books.
But the trustees
talked him into a broader subject field, namely history of printing, on the grounds that he had made his fortune as a publisher.
This is a very interesting example of the institutional education process.
Sitting down and talking.
It's a wonderful idea, sir.
But we can do something even more wonderful.
Yeah, exactly.
And also, it's an educational function.
I mean, here was a man who had the enthusiasm and he had the money.
What he didn't have was a focus that was public-spirited in a way that would really be useful to the public of Chicago.
It's not that he lacked the will or that he was stupid.
It was just that he wasn't informed about what was best or most useful to the public, to the reading public.
So they persuaded him into the notion of history of printing.
And...
Indeed, his only really lasting monument is the Wing Foundation and the spectacular collection.
So he left his collection, which is a good collection, right?
It's an interesting collection as an example of Victorian taste in the city, and particularly of the taste of a kind of eccentric bachelor gentleman.
I would like to do an exhibit on him someday, just because he's such a Chicago type.
You know, somebody who came here as a printer's apprentice and made a fortune,
and acquired culture along the way on the frontier.
You want a resident theme?
Isaiah Thomas.
That's right.
Exactly.
He's that kind of a figure, but transposed a century later.
You see, the pieces are falling into place, aren't they, you know?
And really what Isaiah did with the American Antiquarian Society is the same thing.
That's a monument to the printing arts.
Sure.
And every possible crazy.
Have you been there, though?
No, I've never been.
You're much.
It's really quite wonderful.
It really is crazy.
It happens to be two minutes from where I work.
That's nice.
To recycle here a little bit, rewind.
OK, so his collection is interesting.
But he was a collector.
But he is an example, one might say.
He really wanted to create a monument.
he left really the money and the mandate to do it.
I didn't say it with much facility.
No, I think that's accurate.
That's exactly accurate.
He left a legacy of enthusiasm and cash.
And those are two things that, in the hands of the right, institutional people can be really developed.
His own books are all still here.
They've suffered different fates.
The ones that were genuinely interesting and useful at the core of a couple thousand volumes were added, were inserted into the wing collection, given a wing classification.
The ones that were decorative ended up being used as furniture books.
There is this category in the mind of some people.
You know, they have interesting bindings and they can line the walls of offices.
And the others are...
relegated to the basement where they still live.
If they're in the new building, they're perfectly safe and comfortable, but they're mostly duplicates of books that are already or elsewhere in the collection.
Because he was an extra illustrator, he had the habit of clipping the pictures out of books, and so a lot of his books are what we call, what bibliographers call cripples, and they're not very useful for research purposes on that account.
He was a collector, really, who's
He's different from me, because we really don't celebrate him so much for his own collection, but for what he contributed post-mortem.
For what he enabled to be born, to be nourished.
But is his spirit, let's ask this, does his spirit course through the collection as it's built, the mandate of
Well, I think one way or another, it's hard to say whether anybody nowadays would find him an attractive character.
I don't mean his spirit as an individual.
I mean his spirit in terms of his legacy, his big quest.
He did set the course.
That's right.
With help.
And assistance and advice.
Yeah.
And I mean, the other thing that happens is that in the course of an institutional collection like this, it takes on a life of its own in terms of the personalities of the curators.
It's been, what, 80 years, 70 years since the
Wing Foundation was founded.
There have been only four curators in one collection.
I'm the fourth.
So how long have you been?
Only two years.
So I haven't put my stamp on the collection yet.
But the other three people are there.
The other three people are people who never would have been collectors, probably, in their own right, because they didn't have the means of the education, but the institution made them collectors.
And consequently, they
their personalities became very important.
The first curator was the most scholarly of them.
That's Pierce Butler, who went on to be professor of library science at the University of Chicago and was a very important collector for the Newberry of Incunable's 15th century books.
His vision for the collection was to create a
a collection of 15th and 16th century books that would exemplify type design, specifically on the level of the letter itself, and exemplify the work of every significant printer of the 15th century.
And by the end of the 20s, when he moved on to the University of Chicago, he had essentially done that.
He bought 1,700 incunables for the Newberry, best period right after the First World War, to buy incunables, and had created a really rich
exemplary collection for printing and printing design on the level of the letter and the page layout what the rest of us have done ever since is supplement that with a few things that we're still missing unavailable to him and then broaden it to reflect concerns of scholars and type designers since things like bindings things like user notes things like
with black books, you know, slightly different technologies.
And then, because of their interests, Jim Wells, my predecessor in Ernst Deterer, his, broadened it in the direction of illustration as well.
Rich was, who was the second one?
Ernst Deterer was the second.
Say again?
Ernst Deterer, D-E-T-T-E-R-E-R.
Paul Wells was three.
Jim Wells.
W-E-L-L-E-S, right?
No, just S. Deterer's interest, because he was primarily an art teacher and a lettering teacher, was in calligraphy.
And what he did was to broaden the definition of the collection history of printing to include the design aspects of the letterer as a handwritten thing, which he correctly saw
At a time when I think a lot of people didn't, he correctly saw that at every generation, printers and type designers went back to handwritten forms.
They didn't merely copy earlier printed forms.
They went back to look for their inspiration in the handwritten letter.
And this is true right up to the 20th century.
The best designers of type in the 20th century have also been calligraphers, or at any rate, understood calligraphy.
One of the...
in coming to that realization, whereas practical printers had been doing it since the revival of the private press movement.
But it was Dreader's genius to bring that perception, because he was a practical printer, into the library and to institutionalize it in terms of this collection.
And then Jim Wells, again, I think was something of a clairvoyant.
He was really ahead of his time in realizing that
the most important undocumented aspect in the Wing Collection was what we now call the social history of printing, and what probably then would have been considered the social context of the printers.
And he began collecting manuscript archives, little archives about printing by printers, a wonderful, for example, set of the statutes of the booksellers of Siena in the 16th century, that kind of thing.
Lots of material on French printing at the time of the Revolution.
Groups of ephemeral printing, which are not always in the Wing collection, but which were bought as blocks in the period of the 50s and 60s to give us some real depth in one kind of printing.
A very famous collection of French revolutionary pamphlets falls into that collection.
Another really important one is on the Jansenist Press, the French... Spelleth my type is J.
S-E-N-I-S-T.
This was a French hyper-Catholic movement in the 17th and 18th century, and they had their own press at Fort Royal and their own schools, and they were basically persecuted by the French Catholic Church.
And so we have a very, very large collection of that.
We also have a collection on English recusancy, which is English Catholicism in the 16th, 17th, and 18th century.
R-E-C-U-S-A-N-C-Y, I think.
Just give her a general idea so I can take it from there.
So each curator tries to bring a personal stamp or give it a little personal stamp?
I think more or less consciously, everyone has their own priorities and interests.
Another one of Jim's interests was in Victorian printing.
which, particularly for the period before William Morris and the revival of the private press movement, had been kind of ignored by the early 20th century historians of the press, who thought it was just bad taste, when in fact it was very interesting.
I mean, this is the period of the revolution of the mechanization of printing, and so Jim collected very heavily in that area.
I'm going to have to go to lunch.
I have a new appointment, but what I want to know is, and then I have a meeting at 1.30, but I should come for you a little after 2.
John Wing now with Paul.
He took a great variety of things and customized the books, if you will, in a way that a lot of extra illustrators did.
But his own vanity was such that he always appears on the title page.
Sometimes he is the frontispiece to the book.
As in this instance, for instance.
That's right.
And this is where he describes himself.
This is what this book is again.
This is The Decay of Living.
The Decay of Lying by Oscar Wilde.
And he's actually illustrated it to two folio volumes.
And then he signs it, prints from the collection of the Old Corner Library, inlaid and adapted to the text by John M. Wing, A Doubting Thomas.
Why do you suppose he called himself A Doubting Thomas?
Well, it was part of this pose of skepticism about religion.
We talked about that this morning.
And here we say yours, John M. Wing.
That's right.
Signs it to himself, because these were books that belonged to him.
He inscribed this to himself.
In a sense.
It's actually the portrait itself is inscribed and then reproduced.
This is the coat of arms of the Wing family, which also appears on these book plates.
Let's see if I can find one.
Some of them have kind of even misanthropic title pages.
Look at that.
It must have been a lithograph you just passed.
Yeah.
This is not the first volume.
I guess we're going to have the first one in order, too.
Did he have these bound locally?
They were bound in the Newberry Bindery, yeah.
Really?
Most of them.
These are all stamps that we still have.
There's his book plate, see?
Another passion of his was genealogy.
Well, there must be a title page in here somewhere.
Where did he put it?
He actually took a book.
The content might have actually been irrelevant to him.
I mean, do you think he read these books?
Oh, sure.
I think he read them.
But I think the books were an excuse.
The book becomes an excuse for his own version of it.
Right, now here's one, this Life of Geoffrey Chaucer.
This may be an early one because he didn't add his own title page to it.
I've never noticed one like that.
Wait a minute, here it is.
There is one.
I knew there had to be one.
Oh, there you go.
Life of Geoffrey Chaucer by William Godwin.
And here he describes himself as John M. Wing, a pilgrim with deft knife and paste, in company of great renown, with rare delight quite to his taste, riding to Canterbury town,
This is... It's fake Chaucer poetry.
Illuminating the Chaucerian age with apt engravings laid in every page.
Isn't he something?
That's wonderful.
And he only did one of these?
Well, there's only one Chaucer.
I mean, every time he did one of these books, they only did one for him?
Oh, sure.
Because the object is to make a unique book, which is no longer...
Godwin's Life of Chaucer.
It's John M. Wing's extra-illustrated copy of Godwin's Life of Chaucer.
Did anybody else do this?
Oh, yes.
It was a fairly common hobby in the 19th century, and indeed there are still people who do it.
For many years, librarians preferred not to talk about this sort of thing because it's bibliographically a nightmare, because what you're doing is taking something which has a publishing
published logic and creating a unique monster kind of a book and which is really a self-indulgence more than anything else well it certainly has that aspect and yet in another way it's a reaction against remember this becomes really popular in the late 19th century it's a reaction against
It's a reaction against the machine-made book, the math-made book.
Which he does, which this man essentially is involved in.
That's right.
That's where he made his money.
And yet at the same time, what he's saying is he can take these machine-made books and turn them back into craft items.
Into works of art, perhaps.
Or at any rate, a craftsman's work.
It becomes something which, I mean, that Chaucer is certainly a claim to some kind of art or artisan shepherd.
And the other way of reacting against that, I mean, this is part and parcel of something that we hold sacred in book collecting circles, which is the private press movement.
There you try to create the book as a hand printed item.
So you're continuing to use the machinery, but you're going back to 16th century technology and saying that this is in some way superior to the 19th century manufactured book.
So, you know, and I think that socially, or at any rate, philosophically, they're very similar kind of books.
Here's Street's Lady Hamilton.
Instead of talking about Extended or Prince, he calls it Toilette by John M. Wade.
He's saying, I've dressed this lady.
I have dressed Lady Hamilton.
He actually has his name on the spine, virtually, of all of them.
Yep.
Extended by John M. Wing.
Decorated by John M. Wing.
Prints by John M. Wing.
I'm just doing this by J.W.
Wing.
Extended and pictorially adorned.
And then adorned by.
So he did a different illuminated and extended by John M. Wing.
That's wonderful, really.
Here's an example where in this Lady Hamilton, he actually had the initial printed and then hand-colored.
It's gorgeous.
Here's very nice.
Here's one of his misogynist ones.
We've got to be careful about showing these because you have to explain this phenomenon.
John M. Wing, an admirer of beautiful women and horses.
Period.
One often breaks your heart, the other your bones.
A pedigreed filly with capital F ran away with him in 1864, breaking an arm, then disemboweled herself, period.
She was a handsome vixen with intelligent, dreamy eyes, transported nostrils,
palpitating flanks the tail of a comet and the speed of the wind he has made this book in memory of the mayor chicago the old corner library 1907 emma lady hamilton mistress of lord nelson of trafalgar and it's a magazine article it comes out of putnam's magazine and he's turned it into a folio book and this one it looks like there are some other illuminated pages inside
Well, I guess there's a second volume.
It actually looks like the title page to this book, Old Q. How many did he do these often?
A couple of a year, or was he doing them constantly?
You're looking at the collection.
I think there are, what, 200 volumes here, all told, although there are not 200 titles.
And these were all done in a period of about 20 years, 15, 20 years.
So we're talking about 8 or 10 a year.
One a month.
I was going to Xerox this week.
Yeah, that would be nice.
They're great.
So anyway, that's the ex-realistic books.
Then this is the Incunables.
These are all 15th century books.
And this was primarily the legacy of Pierce Butler, you remember?
We talked about Pierce Butler.
And everywhere where you see a...
a box, it usually means that there's a binding that's worth preserving as an object.
In this case, a 15th century scholar's binding.
It's wrapped in a soft vellum.
It's the cheapest kind of binding of the period, and all the rarer for that in some ways.
Otherwise, it may have a 19th century collection.
Well, this is another early leather binding, probably 16th century.
But it may also have a 19th or 20th century collector's binding of some sort.
It's early again.
One of the pleasures of the collection is because they were collected largely in the 19th century or from collectors right after the Second World War, yeah, right after the First World War, rather, because of that, often they've never been rebound.
They have early or original bindings or a field of wormhole on their hands.
You have fun up here, I'll bet.
You enjoy this.
Well, in fact, I'm writing an article right now which concerns this man right here.
These are arranged by printer.
So all the works of one printer, in this case, Antonio Miscomini, who was a printer at Florence in the 1480s and 90s,
I'm doing an article on him, and all of his books that we own are right here, because this is the way they wrote.
That's about 15 books, I'd say.
Miscomini?
Miscomini, yeah.
M-I-S, C-O-M-I-N-I.
Antonio.
Okay, the rest of the collection, then, is arranged chronologically.
Let's just lay this here so I don't forget that.
Starting with 15th century books, there's some material on
I noticed there are no sprinklers, but what do we, thank God, but do you have CO2 or something in here?
Only in the vault.
We have Halon in the vault.
Halon.
But this part of the building has a very sophisticated smoke alarm system.
The notion is that we should get to it with a fire extinguisher first.
That's what we're doing in the new building, by the way.
Yeah, we decided that we didn't want to risk putting Halon in the whole building.
Have you been to the Beinecke?
The Beinecke is kind of scary.
Yeah, when you kill people.
Anyway, the 16th century books are arranged just like the 15th century ones, chronologically then by country, and then by printer.
So all the works of a printer beginning with R, in this case, are together, and then there's an S printer, and so forth.
As you go across the shelf, you see a lot of copies of Terence, because the decision was made early on
that we would try and collect every edition of Terence, Terence being a Roman dramatic writer who was used as a school book in the Renaissance.
So from the invention of printing forward, it was very commonly reprinted, both in these big scholarly editions like this that are primarily for university-level scholars or for performers, because it was also used on the stage.
in little school books.
It's T-E-R-E-N-C-E in it.
Of all of those, the Roman comedian, Terence.
And often they have more commentary than text.
So there are all kinds of layout problems.
They have illustrations.
How old is this?
This is a 16th century one.
So the commentary actually was... I'm surprised to see commentary laid in with the...
Well, because it was such an intensive subject of study, it got these incredibly complicated commentaries.
Look, it's all commentary, no type.
There's a little bit of text.
And you see, it's a particularly interesting printing problem because different sizes of type for different purposes, and the layout has to be considered on every page.
There's all commentary, no text.
Now, have you treated this?
You must...
No, this is pretty much in its original state.
This one came.
$45 somebody paid.
No?
That's what it says.
I think we're going to fetch a little more than that in the market today, don't you think?
Yeah, this was bought by us in 1951.
And the binding is a 20th century collector's binding.
But that $45 price is probably earlier than 1951.
It has to be.
Although, 51 is well before the great inflation.
Did you have any run-ins with Mr. Blumberg out here?
No, who is he?
He's the fellow that they arrested in Iowa.
Oh, right, yeah.
No, we worried about that one.
As far as we can tell, we never saw him.
Here's one in a 16th century.
That's the kind of thing that made me think of it as a book plate.
He also collected book plates.
Carved the vault like little trophies.
This is the Wing Collection book plate, not Wing Zone book plate.
Instead of it, but he would have added that to his collection.
And you see this is a Terence with an illustrated frontispiece and a big index.
Do you have any Caxton's?
Oh, yeah.
Will you show me one?
Sure.
They're in the vault.
We'll have to go in the vault.
Oh, that would be nice.
I promise I'll be a good boy.
Caxons are so much rarer than most other incunables that we all fall into that category.
Well, every Caxon.
Yeah.
How many did Pepys have?
About 16 or actually?
Wow.
Yeah, of course, his incunable, his English incunable collection is really unmatched.
It's magnificent.
Yeah.
That was nice.
Sit at the table, and I'll bring you some things.
A lot.
I'd love to let you walk around this time.
Okay.
I will sit right here.
This is the rare book vault.
Signing the page in the rare book vault.
There it is.
Let's say these six.
This is Bob Carroll, who is the head of the rare bookstore department.
Nick is writing a book on book collectors.
Oh.
I'm suggesting to him that we've collected collectors as much as we can.
American, worldwide?
British and American, and historical.
A lot of our incunables, a lot of our
rare for seditions of all sorts, come from the Louis Silver collection.
It was H. Silver.
That's right.
And he was a trustee of the Newberry.
Bob, do you know what he did?
Ask him when he comes back.
A Chicago businessman and a trustee of the Newberry, who intended his collection to come to the Newberry and was buying, you know, sure, help yourself, at him, who was, who was... I'm sorry, I really don't want to fool him, you know.
Oh, my.
This is the Christine de Pizan.
Yeah.
He intended his collection to come to the library.
What did Louis Silver do?
He owned a chain of hotels.
Oh, okay.
And my understanding is he expected his collection to come to the library, but in the latter part of his life, he had sort of financial embarrassments.
He was a trustee of the Newberry, too, for quite a while, I guess.
And I think...
I'm not sure that it wasn't his relic.
Well, his will, he obviously didn't leave it to us as well.
But I think maybe it was his heirs who made this thing to sell it to Texas.
Well, it was to be sold to Texas.
That was?
Yeah, the whole of the silver collection.
Really?
I was going to go to the collection.
This is one of our big coups.
Well, tell me a little bit about this.
That's 1490, by the way.
The person at Pizan.
Yeah.
Apparently the word was that the University of Texas had made an offer for this collection and it had been accepted and they considered it a done deal.
Texas did.
But apparently we got wind of it here and did a little behind the scenes investigation and found out that they hadn't really signed anything.
And Bill Towner, who was then a brand-new president here, was it in, what, 62 or something?
Something like that?
Right at the beginning of Harry Ransom's... Well, and it was the beginning of Bill Towner's time, too.
Bill came in 62.
And this was seen as being, you know, could be a chance to really do something great.
So I guess he got the trustees together, and they agreed to do something they had never done before, which was draw on capital to the tune of... Two million dollars.
Two million dollars.
And they just, and figured, well, we'll make it up, we'll borrow it, and we'll sell duplicates.
We'll generate a lot of duplicates.
$2 million in 1962?
I think it was.
And the decision was to do that, and then to, he also at the same time got them to agree to a new capital campaign.
It was the first time that Newberry had ever gone out to raise money in a public way.
So the acquisition...
was a kickoff for the First Capital Campaign, which, in a sense, moved the Newberry into the 20th century, 62 years into the 20th century.
But because we had always simply existed on our endowment until that period, essentially, and it had been enlarged by trustees and other people who were associated with the library,
but we had never done a public fundraising before, and they used the collection and an exhibit around the collection.
The silver collection.
So I've got to be able to find some things on this.
Yeah, I can find some stuff on it.
We've got a pile of clippings on it.
I'd love to see it.
I'm doing a chapter on Texas, and these are the kinds of stories that... The librarians love to tell the one that got away collection.
story if they got it.
Let me ask you a question.
Did they match Texas's price or did they be a... I'm not sure that it wasn't less, but it was cash or something.
Well, and the heirs were glad, I think, of the consideration of keeping it in the center since it had been here.
So Silver was a major collector of incunables, as I said.
English and American first editions, I think is the way it was, isn't it?
Or was it English first editions?
Well, the Speculum was a silver book.
That's right.
He had beautiful manuscripts, he had a lot of English first editions.
I don't know if there was much modern literature.
As a matter of fact, there's a little sketch of silver in that book I was telling you about, if it's the book you're thinking of, and I remember reading that and this person was quite
quite uh down on the newberry for having done this this was considered not quite not quite kosher or something this book on collecting yeah what book i'm collecting was this i'll see if i can dig it out but it's just one that i think it's called american book club okay i'll check that yeah america but he's got a sketch on on silver and he talks about how the newberry kind of stole that's that's that's don dixon's book um
But we did go through our collection and find a number of duplicates, and there was a great big sale at Sotheby's, which I think must have been the first of the big library duplicate sales.
Well, the one that is typically said to have started the stampede in book prices.
That sale was?
Yeah, that was a Sotheby's sale.
The silver sale at Sotheby's in 1964.
It was important enough that they made a film of it.
Sotheby's made a film of it, which we have, actually.
People might even enjoy seeing it.
It's a screamingly funny film.
Of course, it's funnier to us that know these guys as old men, to see them all.
It's a film of what?
Of the sale.
It's the auctioneer calling off the lot.
And there's a narration and they talk about it.
Because it did bring a lot of really important books into the auction room.
They hadn't been there, some of them, for a long, long time.
It was a blockbuster sale.
In fact, I've got a copy of that catalog.
You know, I've got that big pile of spiral bomb copies.
I'm having fun.
This is what I came for.
I can tell what you're really interested in is library gossip.
Well, yeah, but...
But that's, no, that's the stuff that the book is made of.
In fact, it's what collectors do very well.
There's, you know, gossip about collecting and other collectors.
I've had so much fun.
I wish I could document 90% of the stories I've heard.
That's right, because in fact a lot of them are apocryphal.
But anyways, the silver sale I think in many ways was even more important than the silver collection because it...
It was presented by Sotheby's as a very public-spirited thing of the New Age to do to let the trade have its duplicates, you know, duplicates generated by the purchase of the collection.
Of course, there is a precedent that Huntington did that, too.
You know, he would buy libraries on block.
He was going like crazy.
I've got a stack of catalogs this high, which are deaccessioned Huntington Library books.
Yeah.
Oh, sure.
Look, it's from the honey.
And he kept the best.
They sold up.
Oh, wow.
Two-day sale.
That's the selfie catalog?
This is a copy that we made for... I think Bill Connor actually made these for a talk.
He gave one to him.
This is a copy of the catalog?
Yeah.
Are there any of these around here?
Oh, I've got a stack of them.
I can have this?
Sure, absolutely.
This man has become a collector.
Why collect these, you know?
But, I mean, there were some books that we didn't have.
I mean, books that, like, for instance, this one.
This is great.
Does it have an introduction, by the way, to tell us a little bit of stuff?
Yeah, I mean, it does.
Yeah, it's got a preface.
Oh, sure.
There you go.
And we've got some emos.
The official story, though.
Yeah, we've got some other emos.
Oh, the official story.
I mean, are you familiar with the garden sale in Haven O'Boer?
That's a chapter in my book.
I mean, if you believe self of these, it's just... Oh, this recent sale.
There are two collectors that disagreed and went their separate ways.
I thought that was one of those collections that had been put together within the last decade or so, just as a speculative thing.
No, no.
Not true.
Well, that was also true of Walter Newberry, that at the end of his life he thought he was very poor.
What was that?
He was a multi-millionaire and thought he was poor.
But it was dementia.
Is this before he cut the will or afterwards, I wonder?
Oh, it was well after.
This was the very end of his... Well, he really had no idea this was going to come to pass.
I mean, he had every hope and expectation that he would have grandchildren.
It would have been a long shot, really, that the State Library... I mean, it's just all the numbers came up right for you guys.
Not necessarily for the doctors.
Yeah, anything on Silver and Probosco would be just great.
Okay, I think I know where the Probosco file is.
That's in the archives.
In fact, I think that it might be good to just scan the whole of the Poole papers.
It's not a very large thing, but William Frederick Poole was the person who set us off on this task of collecting on block collections that had been formed by other collectors.
That's very important.
And the two most important were the Probasco collection and then the Pio Resse collection, R-E-S-S-E, who was a
Italian noblemen of some sort who had an early music collection.
And it's the origin of our important Italian, our important holdings of early music, which are usually ranked first or second in the country for early music theory, particularly.
If you're second, who's first?
Well, the competition is between us and the Eastman School in Rochester, which is a very, very important collection.
Isn't that interesting?
Yeah.
And I don't know whether that came from Eastman or not, but the Eastman School collection, I've seen it, it's wonderful.
It's great for music printing as well.
Did you know the names of anybody in Syracuse, by the way?
No, I don't know anybody who still is there.
Does that ring a bell with you at Syracuse?
Has David gone there?
Yeah, David Stanton is the librarian who used to be here.
He used to be an associate librarian here.
I always get Syracuse and Rochester confused, but it's Syracuse.
Was that kind of the talk that Syracuse went a little wild?
Yeah, that's what I heard, was that they had overbought, and then at some point, you know, the university isn't a really rich university, and they discovered that they were building buildings and trying to catalog, and ran out of money, and the university decided to put the brakes on it, on the ambition of the man who was building.
But I don't know who it was.
The Syracuse collection is interesting in any case, because already at the same time that we were buying Probasco and Pio Rese and Bonaparte, which are our big 19th century acquisitions.
And this is the coalition's big brother, you would say.
That's right.
At the same time we were buying that, they were in the market and bought the collection of Leopold von Ranke.
who was the greatest of the... You mean in the 1890s?
Yes.
Syracuse bought the von Raunke?
About the von Raunke collection.
He was the greatest of the German historians of the 19th century.
And he wanted his collection to go to the Prussian State Library in Berlin, which said, oh, no, we have all that stuff.
And so they sent it.
They put it on the... His heir said, well, damn it, then no German library is going to have it.
They put it on the market.
And it was bought by Syracuse.
And the catalog was finally done...
about 10 years ago when Sidney Hutner was there.
Sid Hutner was from the University of Chicago, or had been at the University of Chicago.
And there is a good catalog of that collection, which includes a lot of manuscripts, 17th, 18th, 19th century manuscripts.
They should have that, I'll call Syracuse, right?
Yeah, you should be able to get that.
They have a number of publications on their collections.
They're the usual puff prose, but they're... Well, puff prose is always a place to start.
You know, what people have to say about...